1. Introducing Networking Device
Networking: Network is a collaboration or connection of two or more zones or devices through
a common linking method. The network allows the nodes to shares resources between the
linked systems. This is applicable in telecommunication, internet and even offline data sharing.
Computer Hardware: Computer hardware is a physical part of the laptop or computer used for
storing data, connecting, viewing and listening. The use of computer hardware in networking is
detailed.
LAN and WAN devices: LAN, local area network is a collection of devices or computers
connected to a common server. WAN or wide area network devices cover a huge amount of
area as the network spans longer. The devices can be connected through satellite and leased
line.
Collision: In order to understand networking devices, knowledge of collision is important. A
network collision occurs when two network devices tries to transmit the same data at the same
point of time. If the network detects such a collision, it discards both the packets received.
2. What is the use of network devices?
Network devices or internetworking devices are used to establish a network connection inside
the corporate environment. Take a look at the concept of internetworking devices and how they
work.
Figure
In this image, HUB, Bridge and Switches are used to implement a switched network of the
devices, while router is used to interconnect multiple switched networks.
There are certain hardware devices used within the network to connect two or more computers
or peripherals.
• NIC
• Repeater
• HUB
• Bridge
• Switch
• Gateway
• Router
• Modem
The networking devices are intelligently designed to connect two or more computers through a
data path. Apart from sharing files, these devices enable printers and fax machines sharing. The
communicating devices set up a path that connects all computers in the network.
2.1 NIC: NIC stands for network interface card. Sometimes it is also called by the name
“network interface controller”. It is indeed a circuit board or a card that is installed in a computer
so that it can be connected to a network. Actually, the network interface card provides the
computer with a dedicated, full-time connection to a network. Personal computers and
workstations on a local area network (LAN) typically contain a network interface card specifically
designed for the LAN transmission technology.
Also there is a WLAN (Wireless LAN) card as shown in the image below.
2.2 Repeater: Repeater is a network device, which used to regenerate or replicate a signal. It
removes the unwanted noise in an incoming signal. Unlike an analog signal, the original digital
signal, even if weak or distorted, can be clearly perceived and restored. With analog
transmission, signals are re-strengthened with amplifiers which unfortunately also amplify noise
as well as information. Repeater operates at Layer 1 of OSI.
2.3 HUB: Basically a hub is a common connection point for devices in a network. Hubs are
commonly used to connect segments of a LAN. A hub contains multiple ports. When a packet
arrives at one port, it is copied to the other ports so that all segments of the LAN can see all
packets. HUB operate at Layer 1 of OSI.
2.4 Bridge: Bridge devices inspect incoming network traffic and determine whether to forward
or discard it according to its intended destination. An Ethernet bridge, for example, inspects
each incoming Ethernet frame - including the source and destination MAC addresses, and
sometimes the frame size - in making individual forwarding decisions. Bridge devices operate at
the data link layer (Layer 2) of the OSI model.
2.5 Switch: A switch is a very common types of networking device that channels coming data
from any of multiple input ports to the specific output port that will take the data toward, its
intended destination in a telecommunications network. In the traditional circuit-switched
telephone network, one or more switches are used to set up a dedicated communication though
temporary connection or circuit for data exchange between two or more network devices. On an
Ethernet LAN, the switch determines from the physical device like MAC address in each
incoming message frame which output port to forward it to and out of. In an Internet, a switch
determines from the IP address in each packet, and the output port of switch is connected to the
next part of the intended destination.
2.5.1 Functions of a Switch
A switch is a bigger, faster bridge. Every port on a switch or bridge is its own collision domain.
Switches also perform the same functions as a bridge, but connect multiple network segments
together; they have a large buffer memory with multi ports. Switches have a dedicated chip called
ASIC for address learning to forward the Ethernet frames. They can also have different port
speeds like Fast Ethernet or Gigabit.
The following table illustrates the comparison between Bridging and LAN switching.
Also, some of the common functions of bridges and switches are:
• Both bridges and switches forward layer 2 broadcasts.
• Both bridges and switches learn MAC addresses by examining the source address of
each frame received.
• Both bridges and switches make forwarding decisions based on layer 2 addresses.
2.5.2 Important Functions of Layer 2 Switches
Switches perform three important functions as follows:
• Addresses Learning
• The Forward/Filter Decision
• Loop avoidance
2.5.3 Address Learning
When a new switch is powered on, it does not have a MAC-table populated in its memory. Once
the host transmits data to other hosts, the switch broadcasts the frame to all the connected
ports. When the other host replies, it learns the MAC address of both the hosts and stores it in
the MAC table.
In the aforementioned diagram, Device C sends data to Device A. The switch will broadcast to
all the ports expect port fa0/3 since the address is learned. If device A replies, the switch will
learn the MAC address of A and the port number is stored in the MAC table.
After a switch has learned the MAC addresses of all the devices connected to it, it intelligently
forwards unicast frames to the correct host by comparing the destination MAC of the frame with
the addresses in its MAC table. When it finds a match, it then sends the frame to the respective
port associated with it.
Referring to the aforementioned diagram,
When a frame is received in interface fa0/1, the switch will look in to its MAC table for address
learning. Through the forward port, the address is learnt so that the switch does a unicast on the
port fa0/2. This ensures that the frame is only forwarded out of the correct destination port.
When a switch receives a broadcast frame coming into one of its ports, it will check for the correct
listing of the source MAC in its MAC table or update the same if necessary and check the
destination MAC of the frame for a match in the table.
Since FF-FF-FF-FF-FF-FF matches the MAC of all hosts, the switch will flood the frame i.e. it
sends out to every port so that very host will receive the same. At this point, the switch is acting
like a hub.
In case of a multicast, the switch deals with this process in the same way as a broadcast, flooding
all ports to make sure that it reaches all the possible hosts in the group. This is inefficient because
the traffic also hits those hosts who do not want the frame.
2.5.4. Loop Avoidance
Having multiple paths to destinations for the purpose of redundancy is a good design for a
network. This enables the traffic to take an alternate link if one link is not performing.
However, this feature can often cause a lot of problems on the network for switches.
Example:
If a broadcast is sent out of multiple links, it will flood all links and could result in a congested
network.
This congestion is known as a ‘Broadcast Storm’.
Whenever an incorrect broadcast frame is sent, it receives multiple incorrect replies from different
hosts and the broadcast process grows as further broadcasts are sent out. This will quickly cause
network congestion and slowly affect the performance of a network.
2.5.5 Spanning Tree Protocol
Spanning Tree Protocol - STP
The Spanning Tree Protocol is used to avoid looping in a switch. Looping could occur in a
switched network at any time due to the multiple redundant paths to a destination.
Switching loops create three major problems:
Broadcast Storms: A broadcast storm occurs when a switch is overwhelmed by continuous
broadcast traffic. When different hosts are sending/broadcasting data over multiple links, and the
other network devices are re-broadcasting the data back to the multiple links in response, it
eventually causes the whole network to go down and lead to a communication failure. It also
makes the MAC Table unstable.
MAC Table Instability: Instability of the MAC table causes a single MAC address to reach
multiple ports, wherein, the switch is constantly updating the MAC table.
Duplicate Frames: If multiple paths have the same destination MAC address, there is a greater
possibility that the frame could be duplicated and sent to multiple paths which then create a switch
loop.
How does the Spanning Tree Protocol (STP) work?
The Spanning Tree Protocol (STP) is a layer 2 protocol that ensures a loop-free topology for
any switched Ethernet in LAN.
The STP protocol is responsible for identifying active redundant links in the network. It puts
forward one of these links in a blocking state, which prevents possible network loops.
STP operates as follows:
Spanning Tree Protocol enabled switches require a common point of view of the whole switch
network topology. To achieve this, they exchange standardized frame messages called Bridge
Protocol Data Unit (BPDU), that are transmitted using layer 2 multicast addresses like 01-80-c2-
00-00-00.
2.5.6 -STP Convergence Time
STP Convergence Time:
STP takes 50 seconds from blocking to the forwarding state.
2.5.7 STP Port States
STP Port States
Blocking: Ports in the blocking state do not forward or receive any frame. The frames will be
discarded on arriving to that port and this port will not learn any MAC addresses. However, the
port listens to the BPDU message.
Listening: The port in the listening state can send and receive the BPDU frames. However,
listening ports do not forward any incoming frames. They also do not learn any MAC addresses.
All Ethernet frames are discarded. The STP calculation of loop free topology takes place in this
state.
Learning: The port in the learning state already identifies its state4 in the STP domain. It will be
learning the MAC addresses from the frames arriving at the port in order to populate the MAC
address table. This avoids too much flooding when the port transitions to the forwarding state.
However, the port will not forward any Ethernet frames.
Forwarding: The port in the forwarding state will forward all Ethernet traffic as per the switch
operation. Also, the port will process all incoming frames and will actively learn MAC addresses
from the arriving traffic.
Disabled: This is an administratively shutdown state. The port in this state does not participate in
any STP operation.
STP Convergence:
Spanning Tree Protocol takes nearly 50 seconds for its implementation and converging of any
topology changes. In simple words, whenever a topology change occurs in the network (e.g. a
link goes down-up), no frame forwarding takes place for about 50 seconds until the STP
convergence. This is a lot of inactive time, especially in large networks where topology changes
may occur relatively more often.
2.5.8 BPDU Guard
If a switch is plugged into a switchport configured as Portfast (that is planned to connect
computers or servers), it could change the STP topology without the knowledge of the
administrator. It could even bring down the network!
To protect this, BPDU Guard can be configured on the switchport using the
‘Switch(config-if) #spanning-tree bpduguard enable’ command.
2.5.9 Root Guard
Root Guard prevents an unauthorized switch from advertising itself as a Root Bridge. If a BPDU
superior to the Root Bridge is received on a port with Root Guard enabled, the port is placed in a
root-inconsistent state.In this state, the port is essentially in a blocking state, and will not forward
frames. The port can still listen for BPDUs.
Root Guard is enabled on a per-port basis, and is disabled by default:
Switch(config)# interface gi1/14
Switch(config-if)# spanning-tree guard root
2.5.10 Power Over Ethernet (PoE)
It is a means of supplying electrical power from a switch port over ordinary data cabling to a
connected powered device. Such as a VoIP handset or wireless access point. PoE is defined in
two IEEE standards (Both rolled into 802.3-2018):
• 802.3af – Powered devices can draw up to about 13W over the link. Power is supplied
as 350mA@48V and limited to 15.4 W but the voltage drops over the maximum 100 feet of
cable results in usable power of around 13 W.
• 802.3at (PoE+) – Powered devices can draw up to about 25 W with a maximum
current of 600 mA. Various proprietary schemes were used prior to the ratification of 802.3at.
2.6 Gateway: A gateway is a network node which connects two networks in different protocols.
Gateways can take several forms, including routers or computers and can perform a variety of
tasks.
These range from simply passing traffic on to the next hop on its path to offering complex traffic
filtering, proxies or protocol translations at various network layers. The most common gateway
is the internet gateway, which connects a home or enterprise network to the internet. An internet
gateway also often acts as a security node, variously filling one or more security roles, such as
proxy server.
firewall or Network Address Translation (NAT) server. Software-Defined WAN (SD-WAN) and
virtual WAN systems serve as gateways between an enterprise network and two or more Wide
Area Networks (WANs).
2.7 Router: Router is one of the most used networking devices used to sharing internet
connection between two devices. The operation of router is complicate as it can be both
software and hardware and operate at layer 3 of OSI.
The connections established through router can be:
2.8 Ethernet to Ethernet - In this scenario, the main router can either be Linksys or a third
party and will be referred to as the main router. The second router should be Linksys and will be
called secondary router. If you want to cascade a non-Linksys router to the main router, you
need to call its manufacturer for support.
2.9 MAN to WAN - Connecting one of the Ethernet ports of the main router (MAN) to the
Internet port (WAN port) of the secondary router. This type of spilling requires the main router
and the secondary router to have different IP segments. This connection makes it easier to
identify which router the computers and other devices in the network are connected to since
they will have different LAN IP segments. However, computers that are connected to the main
router will not be able to communicate with the secondary router, and vice versa since there are
two different networks. Before you connect a Linksys router to another router, make sure that
both routers have different IP Addresses. This is necessary to avoid conflict and connectivity
issues in the local network if they have similar IP Addresses.
• Token ring to internet- Token ring local area network (LAN) technology is a
communications protocol for local area networks.
2.10 Modem: MODEM stands for modulator-demodulator. A modem is a device or program that
enables a computer to transmit data over, for example, telephone or cable lines. Computer
information is stored digitally, whereas information transmitted over telephone lines is
transmitted in the form of analog waves. A modem converts between these two forms (analog to
digital and vice versa).
Figure – Connecting ISP modem to the Linksys Router, to enable internet access to the connected devices
2.11 Difference between Hub and Switch:
Hub Switch
Layer 1 device Layer 2 device
Does not recognize MAC Address Recognizes MAC Address
Broadcast device, Slower in operation Unicast Device, faster in operation
Cheap device Expensive device
3. What is Topology?
Network topology is the arrangement of the various elements (links, nodes, etc.) of a computer
network. Essentially, it is the topological structure of a network and may be depicted physically or
logically.
Topologies are divided into two types. One is called physical topology & another one is logical
topology.
Physical topology is the placement of the various components of a network, including device
location and cable installation, while logical topology illustrates how data flows within a network,
regardless of its physical design.
Distances between nodes, physical interconnections, transmission rates, or signal types may
differ between two networks, yet their topologies may be identical.
There are a number of reasons to understand about topology:
• The network topology impacts performance
• The network topology is a factor in determining the media type used to cable the network
• The networking topology impacts the cost of cabling the network.
• Some access methods work only with specific topologies.
• Knowledge of network layout / topology helps to optimize the network performance and
troubleshoot network performance issues.
• The table shows the cable types associated with each topology.
Topology Cable Type
Linear bus Thin coaxial Thick coaxial
Star bus Unshielded twisted pair (UTP)
Ring Shielded twisted pair (STP) Unshielded twisted pair (UTP)
Fiber optic (FDDI rings)
3.1. Types of Topologies
There are 6 different types of physical topologies. They are:
• BUS topology
• RING topology
• STAR topology
• MESH topology
• TREE topology
• HYBRID topology
3.1.1 BUS topology
Bus topology is a network where all the nodes are connected with each other with a single
common cable. When one node wants to access another node on the network then it puts a
message addressed to that device on the bus network.
Advantages of BUS network:
1. It is very easy to connect a node or peripheral in this network.
2. Bus network requires less cable length than any other topologies.
- Disadvantages of BUS network:
1. As the total network is depended on a single cable so if any problem occurs in the main cable,
the entire network shuts down.
2. At the start & the end point of the main cable terminators are required to build up the network.
3. This network cannot be used as a stand-alone solution in a large building.
3.1.2 RING TOPOLOGY:
When each device is serially connected in a closed ring pattern with a single cable then the
network system is called ring topology. As a train crosses all the platforms to reach its
destination, ring topology does the same to pass a message from one node to another node.
Advantages of ring topology:
1. The network does not do anything without order. It needs to access the token & the opportunity
to transmit.
2. In this network each & every node has equal access to resources.
3. The performance does not get interrupted by any additional components.
4. Network server is not needed to control the connection between nodes.
Disadvantages of ring topology:
1. In this ring network if any node breaks down then the entire network system stops working.
2. The speed of transferring data is slower than any other topologies just because a packet of
data passes through all the nodes between sender & receiver node.
3. The entire network could be affected by moving, adding & changing of devices.
3.1.3 STAR TOPOLOGY:
In this configuration all nodes are connected to a central Hub with separated cables. Here the
central node or hub acts like the main server & the other nodes which are connected to the
central node, act like client devices.
Advantages of star topology:
1. In this type of network it is very easy to add or remove a node to the network system.
2. Here if any fault occurs it is very easy to find out & fix it up.
3. If anyone node faces problem, the rest nodes perform smoothly without effecting the whole
network.
Disadvantages of star topology:
1. It is more expensive than any other topologies to build up the network because it requires
excessive length of cable.
2. The entire network goes down if the central node (hub) does not work properly & also if the
other important nodes are disconnected from the network, example file server node stops working
3. The central hub is expensive which makes the network more expensive.
3.1.4 MESH TOPOLOGY:
Here each & every network is interconnected with each other. It works independently.
Advantages of Mesh topology:
1. Adding or removing nodes in this network could be done easily without interrupting the other
nodes & the network.
2. Here the transmission of data is very easy because it transfers data from different nodes
simultaneously.
3. In this configuration transfer of data does not get affected by any peripherals because if one
node fails there is always an alternative one.
Disadvantages of Mesh topology:
1. It is very hard to configure the network & also very difficult to maintain.
2. Mesh topology is comparatively expensive when compared with other topologies like ring or
star topology.
3.1.5 TREE TOPOLOGY:
A tree topology looks like the branches of the tree where each & every nodes are connected
with its parent’s node. It is also called by the name star+bus topology.
Advantages of tree topology:
1. Here finding out any fault is very easy & not too hard to maintain.
2. If one of the any nodes get damaged the other hierarchical nodes are not affected.
3. It is very easy to extend the network as much as administrator wants.
Disadvantages of tree topology:
1. The network requires high maintenance.
2. A lot of cable is required to establish the network system.
3. Troubleshooting of problems is highly difficult.
3.1.6 HYBRID TOPOLOGY:
Hybrid topology is the combination of two or more different network topologies.
This network is a mixture of both peer-to-peer & client-server network. It can be either wired or
wireless network.
Advantages of hybrid topology:
1. Here in this network the troubleshooting is far better than any other topologies.
2. This type of network is very easy to expand.
Disadvantages of hybrid topology:
1. The structure of the network is hard to understand.
2. It is very expensive to build up the entire network because of the requirement of cables & other
peripherals.
3. Multi-station Access Unit MAU is required.
